And he ran into some things down there that he hadn't even dreamed about at Miami.
And he left there and was probably the number two man with the Atlanta Olympic Committee.
scheduling of events and working with the foreign, I mean, the international federations, which he had a big job.
Then after that, he went to work for Turner Sports as vice president and since then has left there and has in Sacramento and working with a group trying to bring professional soccer to Sacramento.
So he's done well and he's stayed involved in track and field.
and we visit several times a year.
Of all your shot put rivals, I'll try to ask this tactfully, which competitor did you enjoy beating most?
That would be hard to say.
I enjoyed beating several of them a lot.
Now early on I had a lot of admiration for the guys when I was coming up that I'd heard about.
I took a lot of
It was different.
I enjoyed beating Dallas Long the one time I beat him.
I enjoyed beating Perry O'Brien, but it was more because I had such respect for them and what they'd accomplished.
My contemporaries when I competed against, my main competitors, a fellow named George Woods, Neil Steinheier, Al Feuerbach, and then later Brian Oldfield.
And it would be hard to say which one of them I enjoyed.
beating the most, I think probably I disliked losing the most to probably, well, maybe Steinheier, but we were close in college.
He was at Oregon.
contemporaries.
We weren't close in San Francisco.
Fuerbach was a little different.
He came along when things were, he was a little, had long hair and wore ponytail and stuff and so we were complete opposites the way we approached things and but he was a very good shot player.
He wasn't real big
guy and shot putters go was very good technique-wise and ended up breaking my record.
And then George Woods, I really didn't like him beating me either.
And Oldfield was such a maverick and disregard for what I considered the way athletes are supposed to conduct themselves and train, even though I did probably visit with him more and
and spend a little more time with him, even though we were complete opposites when it came out.
But by then, it was later in my career, and I'd mellowed a little bit on this competition thing.
I used to, I grew up a time you really had to dislike your competitors to compete as hard as you need to against them, and that's the way I approached it.
Probably if I had to do it over, I might do that a little different, but I was really intense.
and competing against them, and it was important to me not to lose to them.
Now, you were, by California standards, a square since you didn't smoke and you didn't drink.
Did some of those other guys in those days, were they smokers and drinkers?
Sure, yeah.
Oldfield's the only one that smoked I knew about, and Feuerbach, even though he was
kind of the free spirit kind of the way that he would dress and look.
Probably didn't do as much of that because he was so, he trained very hard.
Or Oldfield didn't pay a lot of attention to how he took care of himself.
George Woods didn't do a lot of that.
And Steinheier didn't either.
They were pretty,
Now, you know, there's some of the guys that were, but it was important to them, and most of the time they didn't want to do anything that would hurt the way they competed.
Except for Oldfield.
He never worried about it, but that was the way he competed.
He was just...
reckless abandon, you know, and it's the way he approached it, and that was just him.
And there wasn't any marijuana?
Didn't know about any of that early then.
You know, we'd heard about it, but I... In terms of the shot put form that y'all used, did everybody use about the same form then?
Until O'Fill came along.
O'Fill used a spin.
Was he the first one?
And he revolutionized that.
Where did that come from?
Do you know?
Oh I'd seen a few guys experimenting with it.
But he was the first one that was real successful with it.
And you know I guess the people that analyzed it felt like you could build up more speed that way.
I felt like the ring was not big enough and too restrictive.
And I think it was harder for a tall person to do that.
Of course then Randy Barnes came along and took it even further and he was a pretty good sized fellow.
I'm glad I threw what I did.
Now, you threw the discus some.
Why not more?
Well, I felt like the discus took away from the shot a little.
And when it came down to the Olympics or to major competitions, the shot put was my, that was what I was a record holder in.
That's what I had to protect my position in.
That's what I was expected to do well in.
The discus was a little more inconsistent as far as the distance by the nature of the spin and the wind and other factors.
Weather influenced it a lot more.
You could be really ready to throw in the wind from the wrong direction and take 20 feet off of it and you still throw well technically.
So I like the shot better.
Looking back, I probably should have been a better discus thrower by the built, the long arms and the long levers.
Generally, especially in the early years, I trained with the discus only after I had completely finished working out with the shot.
That's what I thought.
When I broke the American record in the discus in Kyle Field with 213.9 and came within an inch and a half of the world record that day, I had been injured in the shot.
and wasn't able to throw for two or three weeks with a hand injury that didn't affect the discus.
And so all I did is go out and work on the discus.
The weightlifting was a little different for the two.
The timing in the Olympics where one's a couple of days off the other, you rest for one, then you've rested too long for the other one, and I worried about that.
I kind of wished at times now that after 68 I would have came back and said, all right, I'm going to throw the discus for a couple of years and I'm not going to pick up the shot.
But I still felt like I had a long throw left in me in the shot and I ended up throwing close to the world record in 1970 and had probably not one of my best years in 1970.
I never was willing to give the shot up and do that.
It seemed to me that when I saw you throw the disc, it seemed to me that you were relaxed.
The disc was kind of like, okay.
You had to be relaxed a little bit in the discus because it was more of a technique event than a shot.
The shot was a little, even though it was more technique than most would think,
The shot being heavy and round, it was more of an explosive power event, and the discus took a little more finesse.
Even though the best discus throws were very strong, at least as strong as shot putters and big, but it still took a little more fine finesse.
No matter how strong you are, if you don't hit that discus right, it would punish you.
And a lot of real good shot putters, most good shot putters couldn't throw the discus very well.
In the Southwest Conference you were, won the shot all three, four years?
Yes.
Well, freshmen weren't eligible.
Okay.
My freshman year I threw farther than the varsity, but I wasn't eligible.
The freshmen threw.
Then you won the next three years.
Then I won the next three years.
NCAA.
I won the NCAA.
two years I didn't compete in my sophomore year in the NCAA or AAU.
Two reasons.
One, I had a knee injury and I wanted to rest it.
I'd gone straight through.
In 64 I never took a break and I'd gone straight through and I was tired.
One of the real reasons was that was when the NCAA and the AAU were in the big feud of who controlled amateur athletics, especially track and field in this country, especially for international competition.
The AAU had said at that time, any college,
I mean, excuse me, the NCAA had said any college athlete that competes in the AAU meet, which we're not sanctioning, will be ineligible.
Their school will have to make them ineligible.
We won't.
Their school will have to.
That put me in a real strain because I didn't want to do that to the school.
At the same time, the AAU said they can make you ineligible.
They told me, we'll pay for your college education.
You can go wherever you want.
And so I'm in a dilemma to have to go to the AAU meeting to compete internationally.
The NCAA is saying, no, you know, you can't do that.
So I wasn't going to do either.
And then the AAU came back and said, well, you know, the Russians are ready for us and waiting on us.
There's an exception.
Your knee hurts, so we made an injury exception for you.
If you'll come out here in a field at a high school here in Houston and show us that you're in shape, we'll put you on the team automatic.
So I went out and I threw 60.
They'd already had the AU and 63 feet won the shot, and I threw 66 in the field.
I had a summer job down in Houston.
So they said, we want you to go to Russia and you owe it to the country.
I said, well, that's pretty heavy, but what about the NCAA?
Well, you didn't go to the AAU meet.
They don't have any say over it.
They don't have any say over international meets.
But we're going to have a tune-up meet in Wichita.
That's in the U.S.
And the team will compete there and then fly to Russia.
And the AAU said, you can't do that.
So I went, I talked to Coach Thomas.
And the athletic director was Fulberg still then.
And I said, what am I supposed to do?
Well, I called President Rudder.
He said, who said you can't compete against the Russians?
He called a meeting.
He got Coach Thomas.
Fulberg, President Rutter, sitting there, and me.
And he doesn't pay any attention to them.
He says, explain this deal to me.
And I said, well, I want to compete against the Russians.
He said, I want you to if you want to.
I said, but the NCAA won't let me.
He said, who?
I said, well, they'll make, if I compete for A&M, then that's a violation on A&M, so they're going to put it on you to take my scholarship away.
Well, Walter Byers is head of the NCAA.
He's kind of the czar in controlling.
He called his secretary and said, get Mr. Byers on the telephone.
Well, he's not in.
He's in Chicago or something.
He says, I want to talk to him.
Tell him Earl Rutter wants to talk to him.
The Texans ain't in.
Well, he called back, and the conversation went something like this.
Randy Madsen wants to compete against the Russians.
He wants to go to Wichita to be in the best possible condition and compete there.
Now, you're saying he can't do that?
And I couldn't hear that in the conversation except that I'm going to call Lyndon Johnson.
And then we'll see.
And that's all I remember about that except the NCAA didn't ask for them to certify it.
The AAU certified it anyway.
And there was only two college guys that were there.
One was a guy named Lindgren from Washington State who the NCAA tried to make ineligible.
He just said, forget it.
He went to the AAU and said, I'm going to challenge you on it.
And they backed off eventually.
But I competed in the meet.
that was unsanctioned, but they sanctioned it anyway, you know.
And then I got to go on the trip, and I got to beat the Russians.
Where'd y'all go in Russia?
We went to Kiev in 65.
That was because Vietnam War was going on.
The Russians didn't want to have it, but the agreement was that it's in the U.S.
one year, Russia the next.
And the agreement was that if anybody ever canceled, then that was the end of the series.
So the Russians moved it to Kiev.
and didn't publicize it all.
It's the only time, because we didn't have college athletes on the team, it's the only time the combined men and women scored that the Russians defeated the U.S.
team in the dual meet.
And they couldn't even publicize it in Russia.
And it was a... What was your impression of Russia at that time?
Well, Kiev was much different than Moscow.
I'd been to Moscow.
Oh, you had?
In 63, out of high school.
And, you know, we went from Russia to Poland, Germany to England was our normal trip.
We spent a week in Russia.
And, you know, in those days, the Russian people looked at us like we were something from outer space.
The kids would come up, and they didn't have gum, and we carried a lot of gum to give to the kids.
And they'd come up, and the mothers would take it out of their hands and throw it down and grab their kids and pull them away from us.
heard we were some kind of devils, you know.
And a big part of the stadium that day was there was about 50 or 60,000 people, but a lot of them were Russian soldiers.
So it was not a friendly environment for us.
But they really lacked strength in Russia and power.
So instead of everybody being excited about the 100 meters
and things like that, they liked the 10,000 meters and they liked the shot put in the discus.
Well, the shot, I was the world record holder, they put it out in the middle of the field.
And stopped everything.
But I'm out there warming up and I'm used to hearing Giggo Maggie.
Every stadium I'd ever competed in, I'd hear Giggo Maggie.
So I'm waiting for it.
Well, we're in Kiev, they moved it out of Moscow, it's 1965.
So I warm up and I don't hear it.
And I told myself, this is the first time I'm not going to hear some Aggie holler and gig them Aggie.
So I just accept that there's not an Aggie there.
Finally found a place.
It's kind of nice to know that maybe I could go somewhere to get away from them.
I get in the ring for my first throw, you could hear a pin drop in the stadium.
Halfway across I hear somebody yells, Gig'em, Aggie.
Shot slips out of my hand.
Went about 35 feet.
Here I am, the big world record holder, and I got 50,000 Russians whistling at me, which is what they do when they disapprove.
And that was embarrassing.
And the next throw I threw 67 and easily won the meet and got things back together.
And I said, that's one Aggie I'd like to run into.
Well, I waited around, didn't see him.
Years later, I'm sitting in my office, Association of Former Students, and I'm in a meeting, and the receptionist buzzes in and says, there's a man here who'd like to say hello.
And I said, well, I'm in a meeting, you know, can't do it.
And he said, well, he said, you wouldn't know him.
He was in Kiev, Russia.
I said, stop, wait a minute.
Don't want to see him.
I said, I've been looking for you for all these years because, you know, you got me.
Embarrassed me in the middle of the stadium and he had worked with the State Department and he'd been on special assignment at Kiev.
He's an Aggie.
And I thought that was interesting.
We finally met.
So I never competed in a stadium anywhere that I know of, maybe in northern Sweden, that somebody didn't holler Gigam Aggie at me.
Now, food and drink when you were in places like Kiev and Moscow, how did y'all... Well, they were real careful about that because they tried to keep us
you know from getting sick and in those days in Russia and you'd get sick you know and you couldn't drink milk couldn't drink the water mostly had boiled meat and potatoes and most of us lost the the big guys lost 10 or 12 pounds in that week we were there and most of them got half of us got sick.
What liquids did you all drink?
They had kind of a mineral water tastes kind of like some of the
So it was a bottle?
A bottle.
But some of the guys forgot and brushed their teeth with the other stuff and got sick.
But we'd usually lose weight.
Then we'd fly to Poland.
Warsaw and it was like different than night and day.
The people were treated us warmly and glad to see us and they didn't like the Russians and so it was a different experience for us going in there and it was like night and day.
It was just a more open society compared to Russia in those days.
and the food was better, and we'd go out and start going to restaurants and stuff then, but didn't go out and do much in Russia.
And of all the international meets you ever did, what was your favorite and your least favorite place?
Place.
Yeah.
You know, where was the most fun and where was it the least?
I enjoyed...
I enjoyed that time in Sweden and those little towns.
But I have to say the most memorable one was the first time I went to Germany when 50,000 people came down out of the stands and it took them an hour to get us out of the stadium.
The German athletes grabbed our hands and we marched through the crowd.
It was a good meet.
They gave us a good run for our money.
We had some guys like Bob Hayes and Bob Segrin and Ralph Boston and some guys like that that were really good athletes and they gave us a good competition but the crowd
was so appreciative and it reminded me of one of those German rallies during the war.
They were chanting USA, you know, 50,000 people and it put goosebumps on you and it took a while to even get the buses out of the stadium.
And that left an impression on me of the difference in track and field there than it is in this country.
And I enjoyed those kind of plays.
I guess London would have been my least favorite because I had
I was a flag bearer in an international meet in London and brought the U.S.
flag in and of course we do not dip our flag to other countries and other countries dip theirs and the crowd got on me.
Ralph Boston who was a long jumper standing next to me and he started scooting away from me.
It was just a little entourage of us and I said, where are you going?
He said, they're going to start throwing stuff at us and I don't want to get hit.
And Russia was not an enjoyable experience, but it was for somebody to get to go to a place like Russia in those days.
was a good experience and one I, you know, value, but for competing it was not a good place.
And did you ever compete before, say, a hostile crowd, mean crowd?
Not really.
Okay.
They appreciated good performances and
And track and field was the kind of sport that you didn't really run into that.
As I said, London probably liked Americans at least.
We ran into it in the Scandinavian countries a little bit, in Finland, not in, excuse me, not in Finland, Norway, some anti-Vietnam stuff in those days, burning the flag and hollering stuff like that at us.
Mostly not in the stadium itself, but in other places when they see the U.S.
team.
Do you remember any...
any place where you and by yourself were with some friends in some one of those foreign places and you ended up not being able to speak their language and suddenly you're cut off from everything?
Well one time, the first time I went, you know, was right out of high school and I was talked into going, one of the older guys,
who's a guy named Jim Beatty, who became a U.S.
congressman, was a distance runner, a good American miler, took me kind of under his wing and we got off somewhere at night and couldn't get back.
And in those days in Russia, only some younger children could speak English.
They were just starting to take it in school a little bit and older people couldn't.
And in Russia in those days, you didn't go get a cab on every corner or get a bus.
And I don't remember how we ever got back to the hotel, but it took a while and it was late at night.
And after that I stayed pretty close inside of the rest of the team because, you know, I was,
18 years old then and I was, you know, this was all, I'd hardly been out of Texas and ended up in Moscow, Russia.
And nobody ever tried to hold you up, steal anything?
Never had any problem like that.
And autographs?
Autographs was a big deal and you had to, you know, I always felt kind of honored that somebody would want one so I tried to honor that.
The only time I guess I feel a little guilty was in Tokyo
After the shot put, after we were coming out of the stadium, Dallas Long and I were together.
There was 100,000 people in that stadium in Tokyo.
And we were trying to find the bus to get back to the village.
And we turned around and here comes several hundred people running with autographs.
and we'd turn around and ran for the bus.
I always felt kind of guilty about that, but the bus would have left us, because they weren't about to wait on us, and you had to kind of do that, but most of the time,
That was the kind of thing that you tried to, at least I did, tried to honor.
And in Tokyo, you were not long out of high school.
You finished second.
Dallas Long won.
Did he have anything to say to you in finishing him first and him second?
All he said, and I threw well there and challenged him a little bit, even though he deserved to win.
But he said to me, well, it's all yours now.
And he didn't throw again after that.
I kept hearing rumors every couple of years he was going to make a comeback.
And that would have been a serious challenge because he was an unbelievable, strong,
shot putter and carried himself in a way that I admired a great deal.
During the time that you were throwing the shot, if you had been a coach of a young man, which of your competitors would you have identified as kind of a role model?
In other words, I'm asking you, which of your competitors for which did you have?
Well, Dallas Long would have been one because early on I saw that most of them were fretting around before the competition and looking nervous or something and Long had a look on him like,
What did I have to be nervous about?
I'm supposed to.
He never said anything.
He just had an air about him that he said over there very relaxed.
And I remember we had a big meet one time.
I look over there and everybody's stretching, warming up, getting a little nervous.
And he's over there reading the program, chewing on a piece of grass.
And I said, you know, he acts like he's supposed to do well.
And I tried to emulate it.
Not that I tried to copy him exactly, but to me I was most comfortable doing that.
Not getting out there, getting some kind of external or internal psychology to get me all pumped up and like a lot of them do now, yelling and hollering.
We wouldn't do that.
If he threw well, he was supposed to throw well.
He didn't jump up and down about it.
That's what I was supposed to do.
I was supposed to break the record on that throw.
You might smile.
That was it.
And it's different today.
What would describe the routine that you followed in your later years?
In other words, you're up there and you're recognized.
What was your routine at a meet?
Let's say you get there a day or two in advance.
What did you do when and all of them?
I tried to get there late because I didn't want to fraternize with the enemy, so to speak, that much, except with Maggard I'd get there a little early.
But usually in later years I was out of school or
busier when I was in school and most of the big meets were in California or somewhere else so I'd come in late the night before and try to get out as soon as I could afterwards and not spend any more time there than I did.
So you didn't work out on the track?
I very seldom trained there.
At Olympic trials I'd go out a few days early to get used to it.
In 1972 that was a mistake.
I would have done better if I had stayed home and came in late and I would have made the team probably.
In times past, it helped me being out there.
But normally I came in late and stayed to myself.
What time would you go to bed the night before?
Oh, about, depending on the time of the meet.
I don't want to try to go to bed too early, but I'd go to bed at 10 or 11 o'clock and get up and try to have a normal routine the next day.
I disliked night meets because of that, because it made the day too long.
I like throwing it at 1 or 2 o'clock in the afternoon.
All right.
I'm going to take a little break here.
All right, then let's say it's an afternoon meet.
What time would you get up?
What would you eat?
What would you do that morning?
Go through the whole... I tried not to get it where I had a ritual.
because sometimes you couldn't stay with that ritual you know circumstances would change it so it was not anything sometimes I might have oatmeal for breakfast sometimes I'd have bacon and eggs and if it was a one o'clock meet sometimes I just wait and eat once at 10 o'clock you know and I tried not to get caught in a rut where I had to do it a certain way and I learned that a little bit when I was watching Jim Ryan in his early days
eat a hot dog an hour and a half before he ran 351 for a world record a mile and I said you know he ain't worrying about if he ain't worrying about it I shouldn't be worrying about it too much you know I think that was one of those things that could get yourself in a rut and and and you spend too much time but you know well I didn't get to do it just like that so I'm not going to do well so I didn't I didn't have a set routine
If I was doing well, I might approach it one way.
If I wasn't doing well, I might approach it another.
Sometimes I'd sit around and visit with people down in the lobby.
Other times, I had nothing to do with anybody.
I stayed in my room.
It just depended on kind of where I was at and what I was trying to do.
Was the food worldwide reasonably standard?
Yeah.
When you're with a team, they've made an effort to do that, yeah.
Like the Olympics, you have your own cooks and everything, your own food brought in.
But when you travel on your own, you adjust.
But you know, I wanted to kind of enjoy the
You know, when in Germany, you do like the Germans, you know, eat Wienerschnitzel or something, you know.
But I never did worry about that.
Like maybe somebody running at 10,000 meters might have to worry about a little more.
And did you, in those times when you were doing the circuit, was there anything that you always had with you, any watch or ring or ribbon or anything?
No.
You didn't?
I tried to have the same shot put all the time.
that I knew exactly what it weighed and what it felt like.
In some international meets, Olympics, they wouldn't let you use yours.
Some meets in the U.S., they'd try not to.
The problem with international, they used to aggravate me.
is that in international rules, if your shot weighs in and is legal, you can use it, but you have to make it available to all the other competitors.
And the Russians used to want to get our shots and throw them just to aggravate us.
And that would aggravate me.
And I didn't like it.
But that was one of the things I didn't like.
I liked to keep it with me, carry it around, hold it.
Now, when you went on the plane, where did the shot go?
I carried it on the plane in a bowling bag.
Now they've got special bags for them.
In the latter years it got to be a little problem when they started really checking stuff like that.
A few times they took it from me and put it in the cockpit or somewhere.
Did it ever get lost or stolen?
I lost a shot in Italy.
I don't know, coming back on an overseas flight, they wouldn't let me carry it on.
I didn't mind checking it because that was the end of the season.
And it arrived in College Station about six months later.
I actually had to go down to the customs in Houston and pick it up.
I'd written it off.
Now, are there any shots that you have kept?
Well, I had one that I did that I was fond of.
In a weak moment I gave it to the Texas Sports Hall of Fame and they have it on location over there.
And they do have it displayed again.
For a while it went back in storage when the thing went bankrupt.
It's in Waco now.
Which one was that for you?
That was a shot that I brought from high school, that 16-pound shot, and I had a hole drilled.
At one time, it got a little light.
It had just worn down, and I tried to keep it just barely over, but enough that it always passed the scales if they weren't exact.
And I remember I took it over, and there was somebody here in town that drilled a hole in it and put some lead in it just to get the weight back up a little bit over.
Now, normally a shot is made of cast iron or what?
Generally they were made of cast iron in the early days and molded together a lot of times and by 19...